Introduce structured configuration model for YARP container app (#3017)
microsoft/reverse-proxy: src/Application/README.md

# YARP Container Application

> An opinionated web server and reverse proxy built on ASP.NET Core and [YARP](https://microsoft.github.io/reverse-proxy/). JSON config, no code required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An opinionated web server and reverse proxy built on ASP.NET Core and [YARP](https://dotnet.github.io/yarp/). JSON config, no code required.
```

## Quick Start

Create a `yarp-config.json` next to your `wwwroot/` directory:

```json
{
  "$schema": "./yarp-config.schema.json",

  "StaticFiles": {
    "Enabled": true
  },
  "NavigationFallback": {
    "Path": "/index.html"
  },
  "ReverseProxy": {
    "Routes": {
      "api": {
        "ClusterId": "backend",
        "Match": { "Path": "/api/{**catch-all}" }
      }
    },
    "Clusters": {
      "backend": {
        "Destinations": {
          "d1": { "Address": "http://backend:5000" }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Run it:

```bash
yarp ./yarp-config.json
```

```text
YARP

  Config:         ./yarp-config.json
  Static files:   ./wwwroot
  SPA fallback:   /index.html

  Listening on:   http://localhost:5000
```

## Container Usage

```yaml
services:
  yarp:
    image: yarp
    environment:
      - StaticFiles__Enabled=true
      - NavigationFallback__Path=/index.html
    volumes:
      - ./yarp-config.json:/app/config.json

>       - ./wwwroot:/app/wwwroot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - ./wwwroot:/app/wwwroot
    ports:
      - "5000:5000"
```

>     command: ["/app/config.json"]

Reviewer: I think this would be broken with how the current dockerfile is set up: https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/blob/3762af1f91c4d7900c43efe6ff94eedb66b7dd12/eng/dockerfile-templates/yarp/Dockerfile.linux#L49

Maybe we'll have to change that to something like this instead:
```
ENTRYPOINT [ "dotnet", "/app/yarp.dll" ]
CMD [ "/etc/yarp.config" ]
```
or alternatively mount volumes to `/etc`?
```
volumes:
  - ./yarp-config.json:/etc/yarp.config
  - ./wwwroot:/etc/wwwroot
```

```

Simple toggles work as environment variables. Complex config (proxy routes, etc.) goes in the JSON file.

## Configuration

All configuration goes through `IConfiguration` — JSON files, environment variables, or any other provider. See [`yarp-config.schema.json`](yarp-config.schema.json) for IDE autocomplete and validation.

### `StaticFiles`

Serve static files from `wwwroot/`.

```json
{ "StaticFiles": { "Enabled": true } }
```

### `NavigationFallback`

SPA fallback — serve a file (typically `index.html`) for unmatched routes so client-side routing works.

```json
{ "NavigationFallback": { "Path": "/index.html" } }
```

### `ReverseProxy`

> YARP reverse proxy routes and clusters. See the [YARP configuration docs](https://microsoft.github.io/reverse-proxy/articles/config-files.html) for the full reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
YARP reverse proxy routes and clusters. See the [YARP configuration docs](https://learn.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/servers/yarp/config-files) for the full reference.
```

### `Telemetry`

OTLP export uses standard `OTEL_*` environment variables. This section covers YARP-specific telemetry options.

```json
{ "Telemetry": { "UnsafeAcceptAnyCertificate": true } }
```

## Logging

By default, the console shows a clean startup banner and warnings/errors only — no per-request noise. Framework logs (DataProtection, Hosting.Lifetime, etc.) are suppressed on console but still flow to other providers (OTEL).

To re-enable framework logs for debugging, use the standard `Logging` config:

```json
{
  "Logging": {
    "Console": {
      "LogLevel": {
        "Microsoft.AspNetCore": "Information"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Architecture

> This is an opinionated, pre-built application — not an extensible framework. Users who need custom behavior should use the [YARP library](https://microsoft.github.io/reverse-proxy/) directly in their own ASP.NET Core app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an opinionated, pre-built application — not an extensible framework. Users who need custom behavior should use the [YARP library](https://dotnet.github.io/yarp/) directly in their own ASP.NET Core app.
```
